HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Judy
Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
nation reflects, from New York,
where the towers fell, to the
Pentagon and a field in
Pennsylvania, remembering those
lost 14 years ago.
Then: the faces of this great,
desperate migration. Our own
William Brangham gets up close
with
some of the families on their
journey, hopscotching their way
through Europe.
Plus, Mark Shields and David
Brooks are here, to analyze the
week's news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Americans
looked back today on a day that
changed the world, 9/11.
Crowds were somewhat smaller for
the latest anniversary of the
attacks, but many brought
renewed determination to never
forget. It's become a tradition
on this day of remembrance.
Bells tolled in New York,
Washington, and Shanksville,
Pennsylvania, the sites where
nearly 3,000 people died at the
hands of al-Qaida skyjackers 14
years ago.
The day began with a moment of
silence at the White House, 8:46
a.m., when the first
of two airliners hurtled into
the Twin Towers in New York. And
hundreds of families and
survivors marked the moment
there, at Ground Zero, near the
new One World Trade Center.
The pain and emotions from 2001
were again visible on their
faces.
WOMAN: Anthony Luparello.
Gary Frederick Lutnick.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in the
voices of relatives who read out
the names of lost loved ones,
along with personal messages.
MAN: I know you're looking down
smiling and shaking your head,
saying that I'm nervous,
but I am. So, God bless,
son. Love you. Keep smiling.
WOMAN: Dad, thank you so much
for your memories. And I really
wish you could meet your
granddaughter,
because she reminds
me of you so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Somber
ceremonies played out at the
Pentagon as well, where the Navy
Brass Quintet played and a giant
American flag marked the site
where a third plane struck.
Defense Secretary Ashton Carter
took aim at attackers then and
now.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: Terrorists who hope
to intimidate us will find no
satisfaction
and no success in threatening
the United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A short time
later, in Shanksville, crowds
turned out for a second day at
the
new memorial to the United
flight that went down in an open
field.
It was also a day for honoring
the sacrifice by U.S. forces in
Iraq and Afghanistan since
9/11. President Obama met this
afternoon with soldiers at Fort
Meade, Maryland. In turn,
American troops in Kabul marked
the first anniversary of the
attacks since U.S. combat
operations in Afghanistan
formally ended.
The flow of refugees and
migrants across Austria turned
into a mass march today.
Hundreds of
people gave up waiting at the
Hungarian border, after Austrian
officials stopped running
special
trains. Instead, they started
the 40-mile walk to Vienna. More
than 10,000 arrived at
the border in the last 24 hours
alone, bound for Germany.
And United Nations officials
appealed today for humane
treatment.
WILLIAM SPINDLER, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees:
Refugees who are coming to
Europe
looking for protection who have
already suffered so much and
risked their lives to come here
to find safety should be treated
in a humane way. They shouldn't
be received with police
batons and with tear gas and
with barbed wire and with fences
and walls.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
video from Human Rights Watch
showed Hungarian police throwing
food at crowds in a border camp.
The group said the refugees are
being treated like animals.
In turn, Hungary's prime
minister, Viktor Orban, praised
police, and said they face
an open rebellion.
And in Brussels, European Union
diplomats worked toward a
critical Monday meeting on
resettling 160,000 people. We
will take a closer look at
families making the journey
to Europe after
the news summary.
Disaster struck in Saudi Arabia
today when a construction crane
collapsed in Mecca. At
least 87 people were killed, and
more than 180 hurt. The crane
plunged into the east
side of the Grand Mosque
complex, the world's largest.
The site had been buffeted by
high
winds and rain as crews prepared
for the annual Muslim pilgrimage
to Mecca.
President Obama is warning
Russia that its military buildup
in Syria is bound to fail.
Moscow has been sending more
troops and weapons to bolster
Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad.
And the Kremlin called today for
military talks with the U.S. to
avoid -- quote -- "unintended
incidents."
But at Fort Meade, Virginia
(sic), the president said any
talks should have a different
goal.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We are going to
be engaging Russia to let
them know that you can't
continue to double down on a
strategy that's doomed to
failure,
and that if they're willing to
work with us and the 60-nation
coalition that we have put
together, then there's the
possibility of a political
settlement in which Assad would
be transitioned out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Russia says
its buildup is designed to
battle Islamic State forces
in Syria. The U.S. has been
conducting airstrikes against
ISIS targets there for a year.
House Republicans staged
symbolic votes against the
nuclear deal with Iran today.
They first
rejected the agreement, then
voted to delay lifting sanctions
on Iran. But there's little
chance the House actions will
matter. That's because Democrats
have blocked the Senate
from rejecting the nuclear deal,
meaning no such bill will ever
reach the president's
desk.
Republican Rick Perry has become
the first major candidate to
drop out of the 2016
presidential
race. The former Texas governor
announced his decision this
afternoon in Saint Louis.
It was his second bid for the
White House, but he'd struggled
to raise funds and was
polling near zero.
In India, a judge has convicted
12 Islamist militants for the
2006 bombings in Mumbai,
after a trial that lasted seven
years; 188 people were killed
and more than 800 wounded
in the evening rush hour attack.
Seven bombs exploded in a span
of 10 minutes. The trial
concluded a year ago, but it
took the judge a year to write
the verdict. The defendants
could be sentenced
to death by hanging.
The flood disaster in Japan
intensified today as more rivers
overflowed their banks. Three
people have died and 23 others
are still missing since a
tropical storm touched off the
deluge.
Many of the homes destroyed in
the hardest-hit areas northeast
of Tokyo are still being
inundated
by muddy water. Disaster experts
assessed the devastation today.
MAN (through translator): It is
worse than I had expected. The
buildings near the river
are completely destroyed by the
power of the water current. I
have been to many disaster
sites, but, once again, I was
reminded of the energy of water
disasters.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some parts of
Japan got more than twice the
normal amount of rainfall
for all of September in the
span of just 48 hours.
The government of Indonesia
promised action today to
disperse a thick, smoky haze.
Officials
said they're sending more than
10,000 troops to fight fires in
Southern Sumatra. The smoke
has made thousands of people
sick, and delayed flights across
the region, including in
neighboring
Singapore and Malaysia. The
fires in Sumatra are set in part
to clear land for pulp companies
and palm oil plantations.
Cuba says it is releasing more
than 3,500 prisoners, ahead of
next week's visit by Pope
Francis. They include a mix of
women, young people and the
sick, but apparently no
political
prisoners. This is the third
time that Cuba's communist
government has freed inmates
ahead
of a papal visit.
And Wall Street closed out the
week on a positive note. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
more than 100 points to close
above 16430. The Nasdaq rose 26
points, and the S&P 500
added eight. For the week, the
Dow and the S&P gained 2
percent. The Nasdaq rose 3
percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the many faces of another great
migration, and the
U.S. decision to open its doors
to more refugees; then, the
analysis of Shields and Brooks,
and much more.
The numbers of people on the
move into Western Europe by
foot, by road, by rail are
staggering,
and still growing.
On that new and exhausting
journey, our William Brangham
met several families from all
over
Syria. Tonight, he
reports from Austria.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's midday in
Budapest's Keleti train station.
Hundreds of refugees
and migrants have been waiting
here for hours, waiting for
trains to Austria and then on
to one of the other European
nations who have laid out the
welcome mat.
The kids here, despite standing
for hours, barely able to move a
foot in any direction,
seem to be taking it all in
stride. Of course, they have
been on the road too for weeks
and
months, so today is nothing new.
While she's waiting, 2-year-old
Maral (ph) Diab tries
to get some shut-eye on her
dad's head. Maral and her family
have traveled over 3,000 miles
so far, by car, by boat,
on foot and now by train.
Maral's parents, Majdoleen and
Ahmad (ph), are Palestinians.
They lived in Syria their
entire lives. But after four
years of brutal civil war,
Majdoleen says staying in Syria
became impossible.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB, Refugee (through
translator): We planned this
trip about two months ago.
We decided to leave the country
as the situation got worse and
there was no works or schools.
And the area we were staying in
was not safe anymore, so we
decided to leave and then
started
preparing for our trip.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Majdoleen's
husband, Ahmad, designed metal
fabrication tools back in Syria.
She worked as a hairstylist and
also went to school. When they
left Syria, they traveled
into Turkey and then crossed the
Aegean Sea to Greece in a boat.
From there, they went
to Macedonia, Serbia and up into
Hungary, where we met them.
As mom and dad tried to sleep,
their first sleep in a couple
days, little Maral seems
anything but tired. While the
rest of the train is passed out,
she is a bundle of energy,
playing in the crowded aisles
and chucking her little purple
dinosaur at me so often,
I had to play along.
It's hard to know what this
2-year-old makes of all the
upheaval in her life.
Do you think she understands
what's going on?
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: No.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What do you
think she thinks is happening
with all of this travel and
trips
and boats and...
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: She think the
journey is bye-bye-bye. But she
doesn't know anything.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
it's better that way, that she
doesn't know?
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: I don't know.
MAN: They play. They don't know.
Always be happy, because we not
let them to feel scared.
Ever we scared, but we not
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thirty-five
miles north, Hamid Yakti (ph) is
also a Syrian refugee
who has been traveling for weeks
with his kids. His wife is Hosun
(ph) and their children
are Adam (ph), who is 3, and
Fatin (ph), who is 4. Hamid says
they have tried to shelter
the kids from the violence back
home, but it hasn't worked.
MAN: I travel for my kids,
because when the bombs coming
near our house, only this -- my
daughter, she's too much afraid.
She don't want me even I go
outside, because she afraid
I will not come back. But she
know everything about the gun,
about the bombing, land -- she
know everything.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Back on the
train to Austria, we met another
refugee who has plenty of reason
to fear for his
family's well-being.
Sifan Ibrahim is a Syrian Kurd.
He proudly showed me photos of
himself in one of the
Kurdish militias who fought
ISIS, or Da'esh, as many call
that group. Even though we could
barely communicate with each
other he, Sifan demonstrated why
he says he fought ISIS, because
they killed his mother.
Your mother was
killed by Da'esh?
MAN: My mother, Da'esh...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes. A suicide
bomber blow up a bomb?.
MAN: My mother.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I'm sorry.
Several hours and another train
ride later, the Diab family is
told they have got a two-mile
walk to the Austrian border to a
bus station, where they can
transfer to Vienna. Maral
quickly
retakes her position on
her dad's shoulders.
Majdoleen says they hope to end
up in Germany. They have heard
from friends that it's the
best place, somewhere they can
recreate the life they had
before all hell broke loose
in Syria.
Before the war, was life good?
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: Yes, beautiful,
and just good. It was beautiful.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And your
husband was working and you were
raising your daughter.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: I'm working and
my husband's working. And I
said, everything -- and we
-- we can't live this. We
won't live in our house.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Yakti
family also wants to go to
Germany. They have already got
children's
books written in German so their
kids can learn the language.
Hamid says he knows this isn't
the right way to move to another
country, but he says they
had no choice.
MAN: I understand the situation,
but we are sorry. Our situation,
like, we come, we run
from the death. This is a dead
journey. This is what I call it,
and everybody knows. The
children is -- too much hard for
the children, this journey.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB:
Future, our future.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Her future.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As we're
talking, a horn sounds for the
buses. Everybody scrambles
to pick up their belongings and
get out the door and into the
lines.
The crowds build up fast. People
start pressing in. And then
everything seems to stop. The
buses are very slow-coming. As
the sun goes down, people get
impatient and mad. Hundreds
are pushing and
shoving from behind.
With Maral hanging on his
shoulders, Ahmad lashes out.
Over an hour, it's gotten to be
too much for them. Even though
they were so close to the front,
they decide to give up
and go back inside. They will
sleep tonight on the concrete
floor of this huge warehouse,
their trip north held up for
another night at least. They
will try to make it to Vienna
again tomorrow.
MAJDOLEEN DIAB: I want to sleep
now. And we wait. We wait. What
happened now? I haven't
an idea. But we wait. We
haven't another choice now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm William Brangham
in Nickelsdorf, Austria.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For some
refugees, the United States will
be the final stop on that
exhausting
journey. Yesterday, the White
House announced that 10,000
Syrians will be resettled in the
U.S. over the next year.
For more on how those 10,000
will be screened and selected,
I'm joined by Daryl Grisgraber,
senior advocate for the Middle
East at Refugees International,
and Juan Zarate, former deputy
national security adviser
for combating terrorism.
So, Daryl, let me
start with you.
How does a refugee get from some
of those scenes that we have
seen in this program and
so many others to a
country like the U.S.?
DARYL GRISGRABER, Refugees
International: Yes, it's a
fairly complicated process with
quite a lot of steps.
When a person first -- for
example, if we use Syrians as an
example -- flee Syria, goes
to say, Jordan, in Jordan, they
register with the United
Nations, specifically the United
Nations Refugee Agency. The
United Nations will then do an
interview, get a lot of
biographical
information, history, family
members, that sort of thing, and
try to decide if that person's
eligible for resettlement and if
that's the appropriate tool to
protect that person.
Not everybody gets resettled.
It's quite a small number. And
then from there, the U.N.
will make referrals to various
countries that accept refugees,
for example, the United States.
And the United States then goes
another huge process of vetting
those people to make sure
it's OK to let
them into the U.S.
It takes about two years on
average, sometimes longer. So
it's quite a slow process, yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how do you
do that for 10,000, 100,000 or
whatever the final number
is, whichever the countries
are that are accepting them?
JUAN ZARATE, Senior Adviser,
Center for Strategic and
International Studies: Well,
keep in mind,
last year, we settled only
1,500. And now we're talking
about 10,000. It's an
exponential
increase in the numbers.
And in terms of screening for
security purposes, as Daryl
indicated, you have an entire
additional
process in the U.S. context,
where refugees receive the
highest level of security check
of anyone traveling to the U.S.,
and in that context, the Syrian
refugees, the highest
level of scrutiny.
And so that is biometric data
that's checked, biographic data
that's checked, interviews
from the Department of Homeland
Security, the intelligence
community looking at whatever
information they have around
that individual, their family,
their networks, to determine
whether or not there's a
security risk in that person
resettling to the U.S.
So that is time-intensive. And
in the context of Syria, where
the U.S. hasn't had the benefit
of being on the ground, like it
was in Iraq or Afghanistan, you
don't have a lot of information.
And so we're grasping in the
dark to determine what the risk
is of bringing some of these
people to the U.S.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So what are
the agencies involved? Who pays
for all this?
DARYL GRISGRABER: Well, within
the government, the State
Department is involved.
U.S. CIS, Citizenship and
Immigration Services, which is
within the Department of
Homeland
Security, the Office of Refugee
Resettlement, which is within
Health and Human Services,
and there are a number of
voluntary agencies involved as
well. So there's some
private-public
partnership once people actually
reach the United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
I think the concern also, Juan,
is these security checks,
especially considering ISIS and
how
dominant it is in Syria, what is
the likelihood of a bad actor
getting through the system?
JUAN ZARATE: Well, you have
already heard the director of
national intelligence, Director
Clapper, talk about the
intelligence community's
concerns about precisely that,
the fact that
the Islamic State, for example,
could use refugee flows to
implant individuals, operatives,
sleeper cells into
the United States.
And the challenge, of course,
for the counterterrorism
community, not unlike other
challenges that
they have to face, is that we're
not talking about huge numbers.
You can talk about just
a handful or a dozen among that
population that you're letting
in that could be problematic,
hitting soft targets and
presenting other problems.
And so the intelligence
community is incredibly
conservative. As part of its
vetting process,
you have the National
Counterterrorism Center and
others looking at as much data
as possible.
And, frankly, at the end of the
day, it's about risk management.
How much risk are we
willing to take, given what is
likely to be a lack of clear
information about who is
actually
coming in?
And we know terrorists in the
past have tried to use this
process. We have got a few cases
in the U.S. of populations
within refugees supporting
terrorist groups. Not a lot, but
the risk of just one or two is
considered high for the
intelligence community.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So considering
that there's going to be this
many layers of checks and
it could take this long, how do
we deal with this kind of
volume?
DARYL GRISGRABER: Well, we get
it going as quickly as possible.
I would say first, the 1,500
refugees that Juan mentioned is
a very small number for
the U.S. addressing an emergency
situation like this. We're
talking about four million
Syrians who potentially need
protection. Not all of them will
be resettled, only a small
number. But it's important to
get the flow of the process
going as quickly as possible,
because the security checks in
particular take quite a long
time, as you know.
And sometimes it has to be done
more than once. Sometimes,
medical checks or security
clearance have expired while
another process is going on. So,
there's a lot of stopping
and restarting in many cases.
And so all of this needs to be
addressed as quickly as
possible,
so really dedicating the
financial resources and machine
power to it will make a lot of
difference.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And during
this time, these people are not
in the United States. They're
in that sort of first country
where they registered.
DARYL GRISGRABER: Yes. Yes. No,
they stay in that country.
And, remember, resettlement is a
protection tool. They're --
people are chosen for settlement
because they're vulnerable and
need to be relocated for their
own safety. But with how
slow the process is, sometimes,
they will stay in that
vulnerable situation for a
couple
of years at a time until the
resettlement process is done.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so what
about the increased threat level
when -- I guess it depends on
how they're received in these
different communities, even in
the place where they're waiting
or
in the country where
they finally get to.
JUAN ZARATE: It's a great point,
because this in some ways is the
perfect storm of both
a humanitarian crises, but also
security crisis short and long
term.
The short term is what we talked
about, which is the Islamic
State taking advantage, putting
sleeper cells in, et cetera,
maybe not a high likelihood, but
perhaps high consequence.
But you also do have the
challenge of displaced
communities and populations
being radicalized,
falling prey to the lure of the
ideology that has brought others
to the forces of the Islamic
State, and a real challenge, I
think, for all of the receiving
countries to make sure
that there's welcoming
environment, resources and an
ability to integrate as well as
possible
these populations, because one
of the things we have seen in
counterterrorism is one factor,
not the only, but one factor
that leads to radicalization,
that leads to individuals
going to fight abroad is not
being integrated, not finding a
way into the society in which
they have moved.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Juan Zarate, Daryl Grisgraber,
thanks so much.
DARYL GRISGRABER: Thank you.
JUAN ZARATE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
looking back at the creations of
a towering architect;
and it's an upset, Serena
Williams' quest for tennis'
grand slam is dashed; Joe Biden
grapples with a possible
presidential bid; the field is
set for next week's Republican
debate; and is the Iran
nuclear deal a done deal?
But first to the analysis of
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
We just had a segment where we
laid out in painful detail how
difficult it is for a refugee
to gain asylum in the United
States. And there are several
people who say, you know what?
If it wasn't for the United
States' foreign policy of
perhaps disbanding the Iraqi
army,
creating a tremendous amount of
regional instability that
perhaps in -- fueled ISIS,
destabilized
Syria further, and has caused
this migrant crises -- is the
United States responsible
or should they be more
responsible in taking more
asylum seekers?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I would
be one of those people.
I think all the things you
mentioned. And then a couple
years ago, we had a big debate
about Syria and whether we
should be helping the moderates,
the moderates, such as they
are, in Syria and whether we
should arm those moderates. And
people like John McCain and
Lindsey Graham said yes.
Eventually, the current
administration did arm them, but
with very little, much too late.
And so you have this war between
Assad's forces and ISIS. And so
I do think it was partially
our -- the vacuum created by the
U.S. and the West, when there
was still some sort of
moderate solution possible, that
helped create this crisis. And,
therefore, we have a
responsibility
to take in more refugees.
It's still, though, bizarre to
me that most of the debate is on
this side of the pipeline,
the flow of people on the
receiving end. There are
hundreds of millions -- not
hundreds,
but there are a lot of --
millions of people in Syria. Are
they all going to come? What
about dealing with that Syria
there and creating safe havens,
creating places where people
can go to be safe, when you can
have islands of stability inside
these two evil forces?
MARK SHIELDS: I agree 100
percent with 50 percent of what
David said.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I think that it
didn't begin with the United
States' withdrawal from Iraq.
It began with the United States'
invasion of Iraq and the entire
destabilization of
the region.
And there's no question that
Iran was strengthened by the
United States' invasion of Iraq,
that
sectarian violence was
encouraged and that --
destabilization. As far as our
-- the United
States' commitment to Syria,
it's certainly been halting. But
that part of that halting
has been lack of any domestic
political support, as a
consequence of what happened in
Iraq.
And it was just an unmitigated
disaster. But the reality is
that the moral leadership of
the planet, or at least of the
Western world right now, has
become in Berlin and Stockholm.
Germany and Sweden have stepped
up. And people say, oh, well,
that is in the self-interest
of Germany.
It is in the self-interest of
Germany to take talented,
energetic, able, committed
people
who have the resources, the
initiative and the strength to
get out. It's a tragedy. David
makes the point that a nation
the size of Syria, four million
people have left the country.
I mean, that's a stain on us and
it's a stain on all of the
civilized world that we have
allowed that to continue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
let's take a look at the Iran
deal.
There were kind of machinations
in both sides of Congress this
week, one side saying, hey,
there's this opportunity for you
to pass this up or down, the
other one saying, how about
you block, that it not
pass this forward?
It was just one of those moments
where you realize what are you
really voting for and
how often is this going to come
up? Is this going to become like
the Affordable Care Act,
where Republicans will continue
to try to figure out ways to
stop any progress on it?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
It's, first of all, bizarre that
you pass something with a
minority, especially what
is effectively a treaty with a
minority. Treaties are supposed
to be ratified by two-thirds,
but now we have got like 42 or
whatever it was. But that's the
way the situation was
set up.
And once the Republicans agreed
that they only -- the Obama --
the administration only
needed a third of the votes in
the Senate to pass the thing,
then it was going to be
a done deal. He was
going to get a third.
And so they got that and a
little more. And so the
Republicans are going to hang
whatever
happens in the Middle East on
this treaty, and not only
whether Iran gets a nuclear
option
or whether they begin to cheat
or fudge with the inspectors,
but the most immediate effect
and whether it postpones an Iran
nuclear program, yes, it
probably does.
But there's an immediate
negative effect and that is
you're enriching a power that
funds
Hezbollah. And so as, for
example, Syria deteriorates and
if Hezbollah gets stronger, then
the Iranian
regime will probably be funding
it more and more and that will
be a knock-off of this
deal. And so the Republicans
will be able to use that.
I think there's a legitimate
argument against something the
administration did that, at
least in the short term,
destabilized the Middle East.
MARK SHIELDS: Iran was two to
three months away from nuclear
capability.
That's the best estimate of
people that I pay attention to
who are in a position of
leadership. And the reality is
now that they are now at least
10 years away. Their own
capacity at Arak will in
fact be decommissioned.
But the politics here are
entirely different. David's
right, in the legislative office
area,
you can never get in trouble by
voting against something that
passes. You can say, well,
I was going to make it better.
Or voting for something that
doesn't pass, the same thing,
because there's no
responsibility.
This was a mirror vote of the
Iraqi war vote. Ever since that
vote, people who voted against
it said we were right, and the
people who voted for it and
supported that war have been
on the defensive. And Lindsey
Graham was very blunt. He said,
it's all the Democrats' now.
It's theirs. And it's everything
that happens, the whole deal.
I happen to think it's a good
step. It's a positive step. I
agree with Prime Minister
Cameron. I agree with Chancellor
Merkel and President Hollande
that this is the best step.
These are nations that know war
from their own people's
experience on their own home
fronts.
So I do think the reality
politically here is that what
had been bipartisan overwhelming
support for Israel has been
politicized, and I think
basically by Prime Minister
Netanyahu,
who endorsed Mitt Romney in
2012, and who, as a campaign
event and stunt for himself,
wrangled an invitation from the
Republican Congress to come and
speak to the Congress
and use it as a campaign post
basically to criticize the
policy of the president of the
United States.
And I think that there's been a
wedge now between what had been
overwhelming bipartisan
support for Israel, and I think
quite frankly the responsibility
lies with Mr. Netanyahu.
DAVID BROOKS: I agree
with that last point.
But on the Iran deal, if we
conceded that Iran was going to
get a nuclear weapon, that
there was no way we could stop
them, then maybe this was a good
treaty to sign. I don't
think it was important
necessarily to concede that. I
don't think it was inevitable. I
think
we sort of conceded a defeat
basically too early, when the
sanctions could have avoided
that defeat.
But the larger issue here with
both the Syrian and the Iranian
thing is sometimes when you
lean in and do something, you
get blamed for it, the Iraq war.
Sometimes, when you lean
out and don't do anything, you
get blamed for it, Syria.
And so you got to have a foreign
policy that is very tied to the
circumstance at hand.
Is this a smart move in this
particular space? My problem, in
retrospect, with the Bush
administration,
they were like leaning in all
the time. My problem with the
Obama administration is they're
leaning out all the time.
And so neither are that
context-specific. And I think
that's just a lesson we have
learned
from the last two
administrations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
shifting gears now to Vice
President Biden.
On Monday, he seemed to make, on
Labor Day, almost a campaign
rally-like speech. And then
he had an appearance on "The
Late Show With Stephen Colbert"
last night. Let's play a
clip.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: I don't think
any man or woman should
run for president unless, number
one, they know exactly why they
would want to be president,
and, two, they can look at the
folks out there and say, I
promise you, you have my whole
heart, my whole soul, my energy
and my passion to do this.
And I would be lying if I
said that I knew I was there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The cynical
side of folks says, you know
what? This is a politician.
He's got a great opportunity
here. And there's the other side
that he's in the midst of
incalculable
grief.
MARK SHIELDS: In this campaign
in 2016, Joe Biden's greatest
weakness -- that is, he talks,
he says what he thinks off the
cuff, he is unfiltered -- is his
greatest strength.
I urge, which I have never done
before on this broadcast,
everybody to watch that
exchange,
that interview with Stephen
Colbert. Stephen Colbert in my
judgment proved himself to be
a national resource last night.
I was, like, eavesdropping on a
very intimate personal
conversation between two people
on subjects of great and intense
importance to them emotionally.
I just thought it was
phenomenal, in the sense that he
was just as open, as emotionally
accessible,
however you want to put it. I
mean, it was a great strength of
his, what has been sort
of Joe tells you and Joe tells
too much. Joe spoke last night
from the heart. And in this
campaign, with positioning and
focus groups and readjusting and
all the rest of it, I
got to tell you,
it was refreshing.
DAVID BROOKS: It was a really
beautiful thing and beautiful
moment. And it reveals what
a beautiful man he was.
But to me, surprisingly, it
reveals that maybe he does have
an opening this year. The
newspaper
earlier in the week had a story
that Hillary Clinton has a plan
to become more spontaneous.
And so...
MARK SHIELDS: Organized
spontaneity.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
But Joe Biden is sincere down to
the bones. He's always sincere,
sometimes to a fault.
But that sincerity comes
through. And that may actually
play this year. It's a little
counterpolitical, in a weird
way, to be that sincere. But
that's who he is. And so that
may actually work.
Also, he's become more
disciplined. He used to -- when
you would go out and would cover
a Joe Biden rally, he would give
a great speech, and then he
would follow with a second
speech,
and a third speech and a forth
speech, and they would get
decliningly good, or bad, or
whatever, decline.
So, he's more disciplined by the
vice presidency. He's had to be.
And so I'm beginning to think
there's an opening. And it's
just a testament to two men who
had severe losses in their
lives in conversation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, finally,
the debates, the platforms are
set for next week. Carly
Fiorina moves up to the -- kind
of the marquee event, and not
the warm-up show.
But somebody's dropping out. We
talked about Rick Perry today. I
want to just pull a quote
out of his concession speech --
or his departure speech.
"Demeaning people of Hispanic
heritage
is not just ignorant. It betrays
the example of Christ."
And I think he's referring
specifically to Donald Trump
here. And he goes on: "It's time
to elevate our debate from
divisive name-calling, from
sound bites without solutions."
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
There's no question he's talking
about Donald Trump there. We
have had harsh words back
and forth between the two men.
But Rick Perry spent the last
two years preparing for this
race. But it comes down to,
sadly, you don't -- very rarely
get a second chance to make
a first impression. And oops in
the three department he was
going to abolish dogged
him. And that's the reason.
But on the way out, he certainly
gave Mr. Trump a salute.
DAVID BROOKS: He ran a much
better campaign this time, a
good speech on
African-Americans,
a good speech on Hispanics, much
better campaign, worse outcome.
It's too bad.
On the debates, I think Jeb
Bush, this is a debate where
he's got to -- he's leaking
air. And so I think the
pressure's on him more than
anybody else in this debate.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree.
I would say this.
Everybody knew Donald Trump in
the fourth grade, I mean, the
bully. And if you correct
him or criticize him in any way,
you're stupid or you're dumb, or
you're ugly. That is what
he accused Carly Fiorina
of being this week.
And I think he may have stepped
one step beyond. If Carly
Fiorina is disqualified because
of
her looks, what does that mean
Donald Trump would say about
Golda Meir or Angela Merkel
or Mother Teresa? It just tells
you something about the depth of
the man.
And I think that it's really
going to be determined. Rubio
and Kasich have hidden from him.
Cruz
has tried to be his best buddy,
his closest friend. Scott Walker
tried to emulate him
and fell flat on his face. Jeb
Bush has decided he is going to
take on the bully. And I think
Chris Christie will throw a
haymaker on the way out.
It's going to be -- it's not
going to be ballroom dancing.
It's going to be a slugfest.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thanks so much.
Now for an iconic architect with
an inventive style, whose
buildings almost seem to move,
and are known for sweeping
curves and unusual materials.
Jeffrey Brown catches up with
Frank Gehry, now in his ninth
decade, but still breaking
new ground. An exhibition all
about his work is opening in Los
Angeles this weekend.
FRANK GEHRY, Architect: This
is City Hall, New York.
JEFFREY BROWN: A visit to the
studio of Frank Gehry is a bit
like a whirlwind tour of the
globe, with a tour guide who has
helped create what we see around
us.
You got cities all
over the world here.
FRANK GEHRY: That's
Toronto, where I was born.
JEFFREY BROWN: Part of his
motivation, says Gehry, is that
so many buildings are just
plain boring.
FRANK GEHRY: Anybody I talk to
agrees that maybe 2 percent of
the building environment
since the war, we could
call architecture.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the rest
you call nothing, junk?
FRANK GEHRY: It's built.
JEFFREY BROWN: And so Gehry, now
86, builds, but adds in more
than a bit of flair, dash,
you could call it art, as with
his 2014 Louis Vuitton
Foundation Building in Paris,
wrapped
in sails of swirling glass.
Are you better at this than
you were as a young man?
FRANK GEHRY: Probably a little
bit more secure about it,
although there is a sort of
healthy
insecurity that I think is
necessary. If you think you got
everything, forget it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Gehry has been
the world's most famous
architect since he graded the
Guggenheim Museum in
Bilbao, Spain, in 1997.
And there have been plenty other
eye-catching buildings, the
Dancing House in Prague, the
Olympic Fish in Barcelona
and many more.
FRANK GEHRY: It was working
with very inexpensive material.
JEFFREY BROWN: It actually
started, though, at home, his
own home in Santa Monica, where
Gehry still lives, a 1920s
bungalow that he reimagined
using corrugated metal and
chain-link
fence, unusual building
materials, but elements of his
future work all there.
FRANK GEHRY: I found the
material that people hated the
most and used the most. So, I
was
going and try and see if I could
play with it sculpturally.
STEPHANIE BARRON, Curator, Los
Angeles County Museum of Art: I
see an amazing thinker. I
see a humanist, a thinker,
somebody who is really sensitive
to what buildings do and
how people interact in them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now Gehry is
being honored in his longtime
home town with a retrospective
exhibition curated by Stephanie
Barron at the Los Angeles County
Museum of Art. We visited
during the installation.
Here are the drawings,
photographs and, most of all,
models of myriad projects.
STEPHANIE BARRON: This is one of
the models for the Lewis
Residence.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the most
important, Barron says, started
out as a small addition
to the home of Peter Lewis. It
was never built, but turned into
a fantastical playground of
ideas that Gehry
would later develop.
STEPHANIE BARRON: Look at the
roof, for instance. It drapes
the building, and it's like
fabric
that has been moistened and then
carefully kind of connects it.
It becomes the connector.
On the far side, you see very
kind of constructivist, very
rectilinear, kind of simple
geometric
forms, and it brings together
styles and ideas. And I think
this is the project where he
began
to see what the computer
technology could do.
JEFFREY BROWN: The computer
system, called CATIA, was based
on an aerospace program.
It became key to Gehry's
practice, allowing his team to
work out its elaborate designs
and giving contractors a
map for fabricating them.
TENSHO TAKEMORI, Designer: As a
designer, we can clearly
understand where we need to
focus.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tensho Takemori
and Sameer Kashyap showed us the
program used to develop
the bumpy facade, or curtain, of
a recent 76-story New York
apartment building.
Having the computer work out the
technical specs reduced the time
and cost for the contractors
to build it.
TENSHO TAKEMORI: If you were to
do this by hand, you might get
two or three tries within
the allowable design period. We
had thousands of iterations. And
because of that, we were
actually able to hone the thing
down to such great efficiency
that we could essentially
reduce the cost to almost the
same as a flat curtain wall.
The proof in this is there were
no change orders, and that's a
pretty unheard-of result
for a 76-story tower.
FRANK GEHRY: It's
like an old friend.
JEFFREY BROWN: The computer
program helped Gehry build what
is certainly one of his most
iconic works.
FRANK GEHRY: I was trying to
express movement with the shape
of these walls, and juxtaposing
two walls that are both moving.
JEFFREY BROWN: Disney Hall in
downtown Los Angeles opened in
2003 and quickly became
a landmark where tourists and
even models come to take photos
amid the sweeping stainless
steel walls. The outside gets
most of the attention, but Gehry
wanted to take us inside
to explain that his first
concern, as always, was a
practical one, the acoustics.
FRANK GEHRY: In the concert
hall, the orchestra has to hear
each other. They play better
when
they hear each other. That's A.
B is then you have to
communicate with the audience.
If you connect with the
orchestra and they love it and
people like coming here, bingo,
I'm happy. Everything
else is, you know, extra.
JEFFREY BROWN: Gehry was so into
the audience experience, he
insisted on narrower arm rests
to increase the seat sides.
FRANK GEHRY: The arms usually
are thick all the way down,
which takes one inch off of
the width of the seat, so people
of larger weight, so to speak,
are happier here.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Frank Gehry has
at times been knocked for
creating showy buildings that
overwhelm their surroundings,
for being a starchitect more
than an architect.
At Disney Hall, he insisted that
function always comes first,
then the artful expression.
FRANK GEHRY: They're not ego
trips in the negative sense of
an ego trip. I mean, you
see a lot of so-called
architecture that part of the
ego trip overpowers the
functionality
and the budget and
all that stuff.
So, it's the essence. It's
finding an essence. Why be
expressive on the outside?
Because
everything around isn't.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's
as simple as that?
FRANK GEHRY: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: In addition to
the retrospective, Gehry is the
subject of a new biography by
architecture critic
Paul Goldberger.
FRANK GEHRY: The blue one is one
we did for Brad Pitt in New
Orleans.
JEFFREY BROWN: Later this month,
he will receive a lifetime
achievement award from the
L.A.-based
Getty Trust, and he's now
developing a master plan to
revitalize the 51-mile Los
Angeles
River, sure to be controversial.
Why are you still doing
this? You're 86.
FRANK GEHRY: At my age?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
FRANK GEHRY: I don't
know what else to do.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Is that true?
FRANK GEHRY: I love doing it. I
love working. I don't know what
the word vacation means.
JEFFREY BROWN: All in all, it's
a major moment for Frank Gehry
in Los Angeles.
FRANK GEHRY: And
that's Australia.
JEFFREY BROWN: And well beyond.
From L.A., I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's news
out from the National Institutes
of Health today that could
change the way we deal with
blood pressure. Researchers
found that, for many patients
over 50, blood pressure far
below the commonly recommended
targets can drastically reduce
the risk of heart attacks,
strokes and deaths.
Doctors said the top line of a
blood pressure reading should be
below 120 for many. Prior
recommendations put the number
at 140. In fact, the NIH
announced the end of a major
blood pressure study a year
early, saying it was potentially
lifesaving information.
Dr. Gary Gibbons is director of
the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute at NIH, which
sponsored the trial.
He joins us now.
Dr. Gibbons, first of all, break
this down for us. Why is this
significant?
DR. GARY GIBBONS, Director,
National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute: Well, as you know,
Hari, 70 millions Americans
have high blood pressure.
It predisposes to the leading
causes of death, such as heart
disease and stroke. And we knew
for a long time that treating
high blood pressure was
important to prevent these
complications.
But there was a lot of
uncertainty as to how low
doctors should go and bringing
that pressure
down.
The SPRINT study, Systolic Blood
Pressure Intervention Trial, was
designed to ask and
answer that question. And now we
have those interim results that
make it very clear that
being aggressive an intensive
treatment regimen that goes to
that lower target below 120
millimeters
of mercury shows great benefit
in reducing the complications
such as heart attacks, heart
failure and stroke
and saves lives.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you start
to say low blood pressure,
people are going to start
becoming concerned about the
elderly, for whom low blood
pressure can lead to dizziness
or fainting. How do you figure
out if 120 is right for you?
DR. GARY GIBBONS: Well, as in
all things, that we must balance
the benefits against
potential harms. And that's why
it's important for each patient
to consult their care provider
to see what's the right
target for them.
But it's important to note that
this study included individuals
50 and over, and indeed
included -- one-fourth of the
study sample with age 75 or
older. So it was inclusive
of the elderly. Indeed, our
preliminary analyses suggest
that the benefit, we're seeing
across
the diverse group of people in
the study sample, including
those over 75.
So, we think that this may be
broadly applicable to those 50
and older who are at increased
risk of cardiovascular disease.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just a couple
of years ago, it seemed that the
guidelines went in the
opposite direction, taking the
number from 140 up to 150, and
now we're bringing it back
down again. What is to say in a
couple of years this number or
this target doesn't change?
DR. GARY GIBBONS: Well, as you
point out, there was some
element of debate about what
the right target should be.
And, indeed, it's because of
that uncertainty that trials
like SPRINT were so important
to conduct. And, indeed, now
that we have the data, now we
have more definitive evidence,
this brings clarity to --
within that fog of uncertainty.
We look forward to the
publication of the full results.
And we anticipate it will inform
those organizations that develop
clinical practice guidelines
that should provide patients
and their care providers with
much clearer guidance about what
the right target is. And
we're confident that the
definitiveness of this study
will provide that clarity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, a lot
of this in your studies was
brought down by medications.
But if you add more drugs to the
mix, don't they have perhaps
side effects that counter
what you're doing?
DR. GARY GIBBONS: Well, as you
point out, it's very important,
as clinicians routinely
do, to again recognize the
benefits and potential side
effects.
It's important to recognize that
what this study showed is that
there was a combination
of therapies to get to the
target goal of 120 that was
well-tolerated by individuals,
again, across a spectrum of ages
and degrees of renal
dysfunction, kidney dysfunction,
suggesting that indeed these
regimens can be done in a way
that's both safe and effective
at reaching targets in a way
that saves lives and indeed,
again, prevents heart attacks
and strokes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Dr.
Gary Gibbons from the National
Institutes of Health, thanks
so much for joining us.
DR. GARY GIBBONS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When Serena
Williams took to the court this
afternoon, her match was
expected by many to be one more
victory on the road to a
spectacular Grand Slam triumph.
Williams had won all three prior
major titles this year, the
French Open, Australian Open
and Wimbledon. She defeated her
sister, Venus, in a tough match
earlier this week. But her
opponent, unseated Roberta Vinci
of Italy, dashed the hopes of
the 21-time major champion
in a stunning upset.
Serena was going for history and
trying to become the first woman
to win a Grand Slam,
all four majors in the same
season, since Steffi Graf last
did that in 1988.
Christine Brennan of USA Today
and a commentator for ABC News
joins us now.
We were all watching.
What happened?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today:
Yes, exactly. What happened?
Well, Vinci happened. And one of
the biggest upsets, Hari, we
have ever seen in sports,
men or women's, any sport around
the world happened, one of the
biggest. I'm not saying
it's the biggest. But Buster
Douglas beat Mike Tyson in 1990.
You have had upsets in
golf. Of course, people remember
the U.S. beating the Soviets in
hockey at the Olympics
in 1980.
I don't know where that ranks
That, to me, is always going to
be the biggest. But in
terms of a story that had been
building not just for the last
week-and-a-half, almost
two weeks of the U.S. Open, but
all summer, as we have been
looking at the stories of
American Pharoah and Jordan
Spieth, and we have been talking
Grand Slams and Triple Crowns,
and here comes Serena just
blazing the trail with the
Australian, the French,
Wimbledon.
And she is at her home
tournament. Wow. No one ever saw
this coming.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why did it
happen? Did she play poorly? Did
Vinci play better?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, she ran
into someone who, in the third
set, was able to play better
and stand up to Serena, and not
let Serena do what she always
does, which is come back
at the end.
Serena has had an emotional run
through the U.S. Open. By that,
I mean fantastic player
hitting 100 miles, 200 --
120-mile-per-hour serves. But in
terms of having her emotions
get -- she's a smart woman. She
gets it. We saw it with Venus,
trying to beat her sister.
That's tough anyway.
But this week especially, this
moment, the idea of winning a
Grand Slam, first man or
woman to do it since '88, it was
weighing on her. And I think we
finally saw in that
third set with the double
faults. Just those things she
needed to muster, those things
she needed, to pull out that
energy and be able to do it one
last time, and she couldn't.
All credit to her opponent, but
this also was Serena's loss.
There's no doubt about
that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we're
taking a long look at this
specific loss, but where is she
in the pantheon of tennis
players, even besides this loss?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, I think
she's the greatest female tennis
player of all time.
And, frankly, I think she's the
greatest female athlete of all
time, Serena Williams.
And that doesn't change with
what happened today. I just --
with the power and the strength
and the durability -- she will
be 34 in two weeks. Steffi Graf,
we thought, was old. Steffi
retired at 30.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wow.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Here's Serena
playing her best tennis almost
34 years old. That is
remarkable.
The toughest day in women's
sports is today, until tomorrow.
The competition is so strong.
And that's why I think Serena
is the best of all time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this is
one of the reasons, I guess,
that we like sport, because
there
is this possibility that
the upset could happen.
And even in the press conference
-- or I guess in the on-court
interview after, Vinci was
-- you had to love her.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Yes. Oh, yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Because she
didn't wake up thinking she was
going to win this morning.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: No. I didn't
-- she had no chance either. She
said "Sorry," like apologizing
to a whole nation for
ending this storyline.
The old adage is, this is why
they play the game. And this is
absolutely it. And it's
-- sports is the best realty TV
showing going. It is the best
thing about -- the greatest
escape we can have. And a
day like today proved it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Christine Brennan, thanks so
much.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN:
Hari, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online: It was once
an amusement park fixture,
roaring
with the sound of screaming
passengers along the Jersey
Shore. But months after
superstorm
Sandy hit, the Jet Star roller
coaster lie wasting in the
Atlantic ocean. That's where
photographer Matthew Clark found
it, only, first, he had to make
his way past a barricade
and a security guard.
He explains his story behind the
photo. It's part of our new
series on Art Beat called
Parallax, and it's on our home
page. That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview:
GWEN IFILL: The twists and turns
of 2016, as Hillary Clinton
slides, Joe Biden deliberates,
Donald Trump attacks, and the
rest of the field tries to
decide how to react. Plus,
the White House scores a big
victory on the Iran deal, even
as new questions arise about
how far the U.S. will go to help
relieve the migration crisis in
Europe.
We will cover it all tonight
on "Washington Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: stopping the cycle of
incarceration for young girls
in trouble.
WOMAN: Everybody had an attitude
of, you're not going to make it
anyways. So, I started
believing it. Back then, I was
like, I ain't got nothing to
lose. I'm going to get locked
up anyways, doing stuff I wasn't
supposed to, because everyone
made me feel like that's
what -- that's all I was worth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
tomorrow night on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.